---
title: "Communication-Safe Web Programming in TypeScript with Routed Multiparty Session Types"
authors: ["Anson Miu", "Francisco Ferreira", "Nobuko Yoshida", "Fangyi Zhou"]
date: "2021-03-02"
doi: "10.1145/3446804.3446854"
---
Modern web programming involves coordinating interactions between browser
clients and a server. Typically, the interactions in web-based distributed
systems are informally described, making it hard to ensure correctness,
especially communication safety, i.e. all endpoints progress without type
errors or deadlocks, conforming to a specified protocol.

We present STScript, a toolchain that generates TypeScript APIs for
communication-safe web development over WebSockets, and RouST, a new session
type theory that supports multiparty communications with routing mechanisms.
STScript provides developers with TypeScript APIs generated from a
communication protocol specification based on RouST. The generated APIs build
upon TypeScript concurrency practices, complement the event-driven style of
programming in full-stack web development, and are compatible with the Node.js
runtime for server-side endpoints and the React.js framework for browser-side
endpoints.

RouST can express multiparty interactions routed via an intermediate
participant. It supports peer-to-peer communication between browser-side
endpoints by routing communication via the server in a way that avoids
excessive serialisation. RouST guarantees communication safety for endpoint web
applications written using STScript APIs.

We evaluate the expressiveness of STScript for modern web programming using
several production-ready case studies deployed as web applications.
